Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
And welcome back.
So far we looked at how methods are defined and how they can be invoked.
We saw that data can be passed to methods during method invocation.
Now, the way this data is passed can vary from one programming language to another.
To understand what I'm talking about.
Let's look at a simple example.
Let's consider this method called update ID, which has only one parameter called new ID.
All it is doing is reassigning new ID to 2001.
Now let's say we are invoking updated method with a variable named ID which is initialized to 2000.
So here is a question we can have after invoking the method update ID.
If we print the variable ID, would it display 1000 or 2001 as updated method is updating the input
parameter 2001.
In Java, it would remain as 1000, whereas in some other programming language it may get updated to
1001.
In this case, we are passing a primitive.
Let's see what happens if we pass an object reference.
And here is the same updated method.
Only difference is instead of primitive, it now has an object reference as the method parameter.
The parameter type is student here and the ID variable in the previous example has been moved into the
student class and similar to previous example, ID is again updated 2001.
But this time we are the object reference as one.
Now here is the code that invokes updated method.
First, an instance of student called S is created.
Then the variable ID is initialized to 1000 and finally variable as is passed as input to the method
update id.
So now the question is if we print ID using the variable, as would it return 2000 or 2001?
And this time in Java it would be 2001.
And in some other language it may be 1000.
So when primitive laws passed, it did not affect the state of the variable in the calling environment.
But when object reference was passed, the state in the calling environment was affected.
And when I say calling environment, I mean the part of the code where method is invoked.
That is where we have the method invocation statement.
So there is this difference between how passing primitives and object references affect the state in
the calling environment.
And it is critical to get a firm understanding of how primitives and object references are passed during
method invocation.
So please make sure you understand this topic clearly before you move ahead to learn other topics.
So this is very fundamental.
And these are the two important ways that programming language is used to pass data to methods.
One is passed by value and the other is pass by reference.
There are few more mechanisms to pass data, and some of them are just minor variations of these.
And of the two, java uses pass by value and we will look at it now.
Basically in this lecture we are talking about data being passed to methods and this data can be literals
or variables like primitives and object references.
Let's consider only variables as we want to understand how state of such variables is being affected
during method invocation.
But before doing that, we need to first understand how variables are actually represented in memory.
First, let's look at how primitive variables are represented in memory.
Let's consider this primitive assignment statement.
And here the variable ID has three components.
One is the logical name of the variable, which is ID.
Second is memory address corresponding to the variable ID.
And third is the actual data, which is 1000.
Logical name is simply the name used in the source code to refer to its data.
An compiler converts such logical names to memory addresses.
And so during program execution, memory address is what matters, and that's where the data is stored.
And here is how we can visualize the relation between logical name, it's memory address and the value
the address stores on.
Right?
We have the memory and here the actual data of variable ID is stored.
That memory address 81921.
So memory address 81921 corresponds to the variable ID.
So at runtime we have only memory address and the real data.
So no variable names at runtime and you need to keep that in mind.
So this is how a primitive variable gets represented in memory.
And now let's see how an object reference looks like in memory.
Here.
A student object is created which is referenced by an object reference as we know that here as is not
an object but simply holds bits that reference a student object in memory.
And by bits we mean the memory address of the student object.
So as holds the memory address of the student object.
And here's how we can visualize it here.
The memory address 81921 corresponds to the variable as like in the case of variable ID in the previous
example.
But 81921 stores the memory address of the actual object, which is 85411.
So the memory address of the actual object is 85411 and 81921 is just holding that value.
So this is how an object reference gets represented in memory.
Now let's look at the pass by value mechanism that Java uses during method invocation.
And as the name implies, pass by value simply means you would pass the value of the method argument
to the method parameter that is a copy of the value of the method argument is made and is then assigned
to the method parameter.
So if argument is primitive variable, then a copy of the corresponding primitive value is passed.
But if argument is object reference, then we know that the argument value is the memory address of
the actual object.
So a copy of the object's memory address is passed.
So that's passed by value.
All we pass is the value of the argument in the method invocation statement.
Now let's see how a primitive is passed using pass by value.
Let's consider the same code snippet which we saw at the very beginning.
We have the updated method which is simply updating the value that is passed as input.
Only additions.
Here are the four points of execution one, two, three and four, so that we can examine the memory
state at each point of execution.
So when control comes to each of those points, we are going to look at the memory state.
So let's go ahead and examine the memory state.
At the first execution point, the variable ID has been initialized and so you can see the value 1000
in memory.
Note that for keeping it simple, we are using the variable name ID here in this illustration instead
of using a memory address to represent it.
Next each second execution point method update ID has already been invoked and due to pass by value.
A copy of the argument Value Thousand is made and is assigned to the method parameter new ID so you
can now see new ID also in memory.
Next, a third execution point.
Updated method updates.
New ID 2001.
However, it's only modifying its own copy of 1000.
That is the ID variable, and the calling environment still has the value thousand.
So once the method parameter gets its value, it has nothing to do with the argument used during method
invocation.
And finally, at fourth execution point, the method execution has completed, and so the local variable
new ID is discarded while ID will still be there in the memory with the original value token.
So that's passed by value with regards to using primitive variables as method arguments.
Now let's see how an object reference is passed using pass by value mechanism.
And it is very important to understand this.
So just pay more attention while we discuss this slide.
This is a second code snippet which we saw at the beginning here.
Updated method has an object reference as method parameter instead of a primitive variable.
Unlike in the previous example, we once again have the four points of execution to steady the memory
state.
At the first execution point, student object is created and its variable ID is initialized to thousand
and you can see the corresponding representation in memory.
We have the student object with ID as 1000 at the memory address 85411 and the variable as referencing
it.
Next steps.
Second execution point method update ID has already been invoked, so a copy of the argument value is
made and is assigned to the method parameter.
S1 The argument value is the memory address 85411 and so it is assigned to S1.
So at this instance we now have both SE and S1 referencing the same student object.
Next, a third execution point.
Updated method updates the ID field of the object 2001.
Now, this also affects the object reference.
As in the caller's environment, a student object is referenced by both SW and S1.
So accessing ID field using object reference as in the calling environment would also return the value
2001.
And finally, at fourth execution point, the method execution has completed.
And so the local variable as one is discarded while object reference as will still be there with the
updated value thousand and one.
That is, if you do as ID, you will get 1001.
So as you can see, if the object is modified inside the method, then that modification is reflected
in the calling environment, which doesn't happen with primitive arguments.
And this is only because here we are dealing with an object that is referenced from both the calling
environment and also from within the method.
And now let's look at a slightly modified example.
Here.
The only difference from the code in the previous slide is that update ID method re assigns the method
parameter to a new object.
So like in the case of the primitive example, now both method parameter and the argument in the method
invocation statement are completely independent of each other.
So any change made on the new object via the method parameter will not have any effect on the original
object referenced by the argument in the method invocation statement.
Let's just take a look at the memory state.
We can jump to the third execution point as the rest of the code is similar to the code in the previous
slide.
So here is what we have at the first execution point where student object is created and its ID value
is initialized to 1000.
And here is what we have after updated method is invoked.
So both SE and S1 at this instance are referencing the same student object which has ID value as 1000.
And at the third execution point, we can see that a new object is created and as one now references
it and it also initializes ID value to 2001.
So the original object that has ideas thousand is now referenced only from the calling environment by
the variable SW.
Finally, at fourth execution point, the method execution completes and seven is discarded.
So the variable as is totally unaffected in this case due to the reassignment that happened within the
method.
Finally, just note that passing data to a method is identical to variable assignment.
That is the method argument value passed is assigned to method parameter.
So we will have exactly identical behavior with variable assignments to.
For instance, let's consider our method in location code in our primitive example.
Now, let's see what this would translate to in terms of variable assignments.
And here are the variable assignment statements.
First, we are initializing it 2000.
Next, we are assigning ID to new ID, which is what is happening when update ID method is invoked.
And finally, new ID is updated to 1001, while ID will still remain as Towson.
So these statements will also have the same memory states as in the case of method location.
Now let's also look at the similar comparison of the object reference passing example.
And here is the code.
And here are the variable assignment statements.
We are first creating object reference as and then we are initializing ID field to 1000.
Next we are assigning as S2 one, which is what is happening when update ID method is invoked.
So both SE and S1 now reference the same student object.
On next we are re initializing it to 1001 via S1, which is what the updated method is doing.
So now accessing id v are the variable as will also return 1001.
So these statements will also have the same memory states as in the case of method invocation.
And finally, just stick this in your mind.
Java is always passed by value, whether it is primitive or object reference.
So that's about it.
It's very important to clearly understand the process when object references are passed to methods.
Let's actually do a very quick demo of it.
Here we are in the basics demo class.
And what we are going to do is we are going to create an array and then we will pass that array to a
method.
And within the method we will modify one of the elements of the array and that modification should be
reflected in the calling environment.
That's passed by value of object reference.
Since our is an object, we can also use it as an object reference for this demonstration.
So let's go ahead and just do that.
Let's create.
And.
And let's just name it as ray itself.
So the idea has two elements.
Let's call a method called go and pass this array.
Let's define the go method here.
Static.
Okay.
First, let's just print the elements.
So let's just print the zero element.
So this would be one.
And let's update.
The first element is array of one to some value.
So let's say 20 to.
And.
Just like as we saw in the slide, let's also print a value here.
So let's just print off one here.
So we are creating an array object here.
So this is an object reference and we are passing this so the memory address gets passed to go.
So at this point, both this array variable and this array will reference the same object and we are
updating the value of one of the elements to 22.
And so it should also be reflected when we print here, right?
So that's what we saw in the slide.
So let's go ahead and compile and run this.
It's fine.
Okay, that's it.
So within the method, we are printing the values one and two and we updated it to 22 and we are printing
this value in the calling environment.
So we are printing it here and it prints the newly updated value.
So that's passed by value of object reference.
So we are just passing the value of the memory address of the object.
We are making a copy of it and it's being assigned here and that's passed by value and that's it.
Thank you and happy coding.